[**Catherine T. Best**]() is a pioneering psycholinguist and Chair in Psycholinguistic Research at the Western Sydney University. One of the first researchers to embrace psycholinguisics upon its emergence as an independent scientific discipline, Best's research and theoretical work has focused primarily on how adults' and infants' experience with their native language shapes their perception and production of the phonological elements of spoken words, including consonants, vowels, lexical tones and prosodic patterns.

She has applied this theme broadly, investigating perception and production of spoken language in second language learners and bilinguals, in children with language difficulties, and expanding her research to include sign language, facial expressions, and culture-specific characteristics of music. Her most significant theoretical contribution is her model the effects of language experience on perception: the Perceptual Assimilation Model (PAM: e.g., Best, 1984, 1994a, 1994b, 1995). Best's work has offered important insights into why many non-native phonetic contrasts are difficult for adults and older infants to discriminate, while others remain much easier. Throughout her work, Best has taken an ecological, or direct realist, philosophical perspective, founded on James Gibson's ecological theory of perception.

Beyond her superstardom as a scientist Cathi is a nurturing and patient teacher, and has taught me everything I know about psycholinguistics. She was my supervisor at a time when I was just dipping my toes into academic waters, and her gentle nature and deep insights are things I try to emulate everyday in both my personal and professional lives.
