[**Elizabeth Anne Cutler**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anne_Cutler) was an influential psycholinguist who served as the Director Emiretus of the Max Planck Institute of Psycholinguistics in Nijmegen. Among the earliest independent psycholinguistics, Cutler's works were instrumental in uncovering the abstract nature of speech perception and provided crucial evidence in support of much of the primitive representations and operations that generative phonological theory was founded upon.

Cutler was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 2015 for her work on sentence processing and phoneme recognition. Cutler was elected as Foreign Member of the American Philosophical Society in 2007. and Foreign Associate of the National Academy of Sciences in 2008.In Australia, she was elected as Honorary Fellow of the Australian Academy of the Humanities in 2008 and as Fellow of the Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia in 2009.

In 2000 Cutler was elected member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences.[13] Her work has also received the 1999 Spinoza Prize of the Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research and the International Speech Communication Association Medal. In 2020 she was elected a Fellow of the British Academy (FBA)[15] and she received the Silver Medal in Speech Communication from the Acoustical Society of America (ASA).

Alongside Cathi, Anne was my supervisor at the MARCS Institute of Brain, Behavior and Development, and her early works on the perception and cognition of rhythm was among the very first linguistic issues that encouraged me to pursue graduate work.
